# pict-rs 0.5.0

## Overview

### Headline Features

- [Postgres Repo](#postgres-repo)
- [Media Proxy](#media-proxy)


### Changes

- [Improved Animation Support](#improved-animation-support)
- [Media Configuration](#media-configuration)
- [Improved Collision Resistance](#improved-collision-resistance)
- [Optional Video Transcoding](#optional-video-transcoding)
- [Library API Changes](#library-api-changes)
- [Reject Malformed Deadliens](#reject-malformed-deadlines)
- [Logging Verbosity](#logging-verbosity)


### Other Features

- [Quality Configuration](#quality-configuration)
- [Read-Only Mode](#read-only-mode)
- [Danger-Dummy Mode](#danger-dummy-mode)
- [Media Variant Retention](#media-variant-retention)
- [Configurable Temporary Directory](#configurable-temporary-directory)
- [Serve From Object Storage](#serve-from-object-storage)
- [Prometheus Metrics](#prometheus-metrics)
- [Internal Hashes Endpoint](#internal-hashes-endpoint)
- [Internal Delete Endpoint](#internal-delete-endpoint)
- [Error Codes](#error-codes)


### Fixes

- [Clean Stray Magick Files](#clean-stray-magick-files)
- [Always Drain Payloads](#always-drain-payloads)
- [Constant-Time Equality for Deletion](#constant-time-equality-for-deletion)


### Removals

- [ini and json5](#ini-and-json5)
- [Client Pool Size](#client-pool-size)
- [0.3 Migration Path](#03-migration-path)
- [Prepare Upgrade Endpoint](#prepare-upgrade-endpoint)


## Upgrade Notes

The upgrade from pict-rs 0.4 to 0.5 might take some time. Any uploads that have not had their
metadata extracted will be processed during this migration. In order to reduce the time required the
migration, pict-rs version 0.4.6 can be run first, and the `/internal/prepare_upgrade` endpoint can
be hit. This will tell pict-rs to extract the required metadata for the 0.5 upgrade in the
background while 0.4 is still running, enabling the upgrade to 0.5 to proceed much faster after it
completes. More information about this endpoint can be found in the
[0.4.6 release document](./0.4.6.md)

If you're running the provided docker container with default configuration values, the 0.5 container
can be pulled and launched with no changes. There is a migration from the 0.4 database format to the
0.5 database format that will occur automatically on first launch. This is also the process that
will extract metadata for any uploads that have not had their metadata extracted yet.

If you have any custom configuration, note that some media-related configuration values have been
moved. See [Media Configuration](#media-configuration) below.

pict-rs 0.5 now supports postgres for metadata storage. It is possible to upgrade directly from 0.4
to 0.5 with postgres, rather than upgrading to 0.5 with sled and then making the migration later.
This process is documented in the
[pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#upgrading-directly-to-postgres).

A notable addition in 0.5 is upgrade configuration. Since the migration accesses media from the
configured store, increasing the concurrency can be beneficial. By default, pict-rs will attempt to
migrate 32 records at a time, but this value can be increased.

In the configuration file
```toml
[upgrade]
concurrency = 32
```

With environment variables
```bash
PICTRS__UPGRADE__CONCURRENCY=32
```

On the commandline
```bash
pict-rs run --upgrade-concurrency 32
```

More information can be found in the
[pict-rs 0.4 to 0.5 migration guide](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#04-to-05-migration-guide).


## Descriptions

### Postgres Repo

One of the most anticipated features of pict-rs 0.5 is the support for postgres for metadata
storage. This makes pict-rs (mostly) stateless, enabling it to be scaled horizontally across
multiple physical or virtual hosts. It also simplifies administration and backup processes for folks
who are already running a postgres server for other reasons.

Configuring postgres is simple. The `repo` section of the pict-rs configuration now supports more
than just `sled`.

In the configuration file
```toml
[repo]
type = 'postgres'
url = 'postgres://user:password@host:5432/db'
```

With environment variables
```bash
PICTRS__REPO__TYPE=postgres
PICTRS__REPO__URL=postgres://user:password@host:5432/db
```

On the commandline
```bash
pict-rs run filesystem -p ./data postgres -u 'postgres://user:password@host:5432/db'
```

It is possible to update from 0.4 directly to 0.5 with postgres, this process is documented in the
[pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#upgrading-directly-to-postgres).

It is possible to migrate to postgres after first upgrading to 0.5. This is also ducmented in the
[pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#sled-to-postgres-migration).


### Media Proxy

pict-rs 0.5 supports caching media, and purging cached media after it is no longer necessary to
keep. This behavior is accessed with pict-rs' new `proxy` query parameter at the `/image/original`
endpoint, and the `/image/process.{ext}` endpoint. By passing the URL to an image to the `proxy`
parameter, you can instruct pict-rs to download the media from that URL and cache it locally before
serving it, or a processed version of it. The proxied media is stored for a configurable time limit,
which resets on each access to the proxied media.

This value can be configured as follows

In the configuration file
```toml
[media.retention]
proxy = "7d" # units available are "m" for minutes, "h" for hours, "d" for days, and "y" for years
```

With environment variables
```bash
PICTRS__MEDIA__RETENTION__PROXY=7d
```

On the commandline
```bash
pict-rs run --media-retention-proxy 7d
```

More documentation can be found in the [pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#api)
and in the example [pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Improved Animation Support

pict-rs 0.4 only supported `gif` for animated images. This decision had been made due to the
format's poor support for higher-resolution animations with higher framerates compared to silent
videos for a given file size. In pict-rs 0.5, animated images are now supported to the same extent
as still images. Available formats for animated images include apng, avif, gif, and webp (although
not jxl yet).

With this support for more animated file types, pict-rs no longer transcodes larger animations into
videos. Instead, animated images will be left in their original format unless an override is
configured, and the default values for maximum animation dimensions, file size, and frame count have
been increased.

Configuration related to animations has been moved from `[media.gif]` to `[media.animation]` to
better reflect what it applies to.

For all configuration options regarding animations, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Media Configuration

pict-rs 0.5 splits media configuration further, allowing images, animations, and videos to each
specify their own maximum file size, dimensions, frame counts, etc, in addition to a few global
limits. Relevant sections of configuration are `[media]`, `[media.image]`, `[media.animation]`, and
`[media.video]`.

A list of updated and moved configuration values can be found below.

##### Image Changes
| Old Environment Variable       | New Environment Variable              |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------- |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__FORMAT`        | `PICTRS__MEDIA__IMAGE__FORMAT`        |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__MAX_WIDTH`     | `PICTRS__MEDIA__IMAGE__MAX_WIDTH`     |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__MAX_HEIGHT`    | `PICTRS__MEDIA__IMAGE__MAX_HEIGHT`    |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__MAX_AREA`      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__IMAGE__MAX_AREA`      |
|                                | `PICTRS__MEDIA__IMAGE__MAX_FILE_SIZE` |

| Old TOML Value          | New TOML Value                |
| ----------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `[media] format`        | `[media.image] format`        |
| `[media] max_width`     | `[media.image] max_width`     |
| `[media] max_height`    | `[media.image] max_height`    |
| `[media] max_area`      | `[media.image] max_area`      |
|                         | `[media.image] max_file_size` |

##### Animation Changes
| Old Environment Variable              | New Environment Variable                    |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__GIF__MAX_WIDTH`       | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_WIDTH`       |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__GIF__MAX_HEIGHT`      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_HEIGHT`      |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__GIF__MAX_AREA`        | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_AREA`        |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__GIF__MAX_FILE_SIZE`   | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_FILE_SIZE`   |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__GIF__MAX_FRAME_COUNT` | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_FRAME_COUNT` |
|                                       | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__FORMAT`          |
|                                       | `PICTRS__MEDIA__ANIMATION__MAX_FILE_SIZE`   |

| Old TOML Value                | New TOML Value                      |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `[media.gif] max_width`       | `[media.animation] max_width`       |
| `[media.gif] max_height`      | `[media.animation] max_height`      |
| `[media.gif] max_area`        | `[media.animation] max_area`        |
| `[media.gif] max_file_size`   | `[media.animation] max_file_size`   |
| `[media.gif] max_frame_count` | `[media.animation] max_frame_count` |
|                               | `[media.animation] format`          |
|                               | `[media.animation] max_file_size`   |

##### Video Changes
| Old Environment Variable             | New Environment Variable                |
| ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------- |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__ENABLE_SILENT_VIDEO` | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__ENABLE`          |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__ENABLE_FULL_VIDEO`   | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__ALLOW_AUDIO`     |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO_CODEC`         | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__VIDEO_CODEC`     |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__AUDIO_CODEC`         | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__AUDIO_CODEC`     |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__MAX_FRAME_COUNT`     | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__MAX_FRAME_COUNT` |
| `PICTRS__MEDIA__ENABLE_FULL_VIDEO`   | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__ALLOW_AUDIO`     |
|                                      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__MAX_WIDTH`       |
|                                      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__MAX_HEIGHT`      |
|                                      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__MAX_AREA`        |
|                                      | `PICTRS__MEDIA__VIDEO__MAX_FILE_SIZE`   |

| Old TOML Value                | New TOML Value                  |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `[media] enable_silent_video` | `[media.video] enable`          |
| `[media] enable_full_video`   | `[media.video] allow_audio`     |
| `[media] video_codec`         | `[media.video] video_codec`     |
| `[media] audio_codec`         | `[media.video] audio_codec`     |
| `[media] max_frame_count`     | `[media.video] max_frame_count` |
| `[media] enable_full_video`   | `[media.video] allow_audio`     |
|                               | `[media.video] max_width`       |
|                               | `[media.video] max_height`      |
|                               | `[media.video] max_area`        |
|                               | `[media.video] max_file_size`   |

Note that although each media type now includes its own `MAX_FILE_SIZE` configuration, the
`PICTRS__MEDIA__MAX_FILE_SIZE` value still exists as a global limit for any file type.

In addition to all the configuration options mentioned above, there are now individual quality
settings that can be configured for each image and animation type, as well as for video files.
Please see the [pict-rs.toml](./pict-rs.toml) file for more information.

For all configuration options regarding media, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Improved Collision Resistance

Previously, pict-rs relied on a sha256 hash of uploaded media's bytes in order to detect which files
where the same, and which were unique. I have not heard of any existing problem with this behavior,
however, as pict-rs becomes more widely deployed I want to ensure that deduplication does not happen
erroneously. In the event of a hash collision between two different pieces of media, pict-rs would
consider them duplicates and discard the newly uploaded file in favor of the one it already stored.
This would lead to the wrong media being served for a user. In order to reduce the chances of a
collission, pict-rs 0.5 now includes the media's file length and a marker indicating it's content
type as part of it's unique identifier. This maintains the behavior of identical media being
deduplicated, while making collisions far less likely to occur.


### Optional Video Transcoding

In pict-rs 0.4, all videos that were uploaded were transcoded from their original format to either
pict-rs' default format, or a format specified with configuration. pict-rs 0.5 removes the default
"vp9" video codec, and allows uploaded videos to maintain their original codec and format, provided
pict-rs supports it. This means uploaded h264, h265, vp8, vp9, and av1 videos no longer need to be
decoded & encoded during the upload process aside from detecting their metadata.

This behavior is enabled by default, but for administrators who have configured a non-default video
codec, this can be enabled by removing the video_codec and audio_codec configurations.


### Library API Changes

The library API for pict-rs has changed from 0.4. It now follows a "fluent programming" pattern of
chaining methods to configure and launch the service from within another application. Documentation
for the new library API can be found on [docs.rs](https://docs.rs/pict-rs)

For most cases, using pict-rs' `ConfigSource` as the entrypoint is recommended.

As a quick example,
```rust
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    pict_rs::ConfigSource::memory(serde_json::json!({
        "server": {
            "address": "127.0.0.1:8080"
        },
        "repo": {
            "type": "sled",
            "path": "./sled-repo"
        },
        "store": {
            "type": "filesystem",
            "path": "./files"
        }
    }))
    .init::<&str>(None)?
    .run_on_localset()
    .await?;

    Ok(())
}
```


### Reject Malformed Deadlines

pict-rs supports setting a request deadline with the `X-Request-Deadline` header, where the value is
a unix timestamp in nanoseconds. In pict-rs 0.4, requests with deadlines that could not be parsed
were treated as requests without deadlines. in pict-rs 0.5 a malformed deadline will cause the
request to be rejected with a 400 Bad Request error.


### Logging Verbosity

pict-rs 0.5 no longer logs the opening and closing of tracing spans. This means the logs will now
be mostly empty aside from the occasional warning or error. Errors should still provide ample debug
information, so the decrease in verbosity should not negatively affect debugging of the program.


### Quality Configuration

pict-rs 0.5 now supports configuring the quality and compression of transcoded media. New
configuration sections have been introduced to allow setting values for each image format
individually, as well as individual quality settings for different video resolutions.

For the specifics of quality configuration, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Read-Only Mode

pict-rs 0.5 has gained the ability to run in a "read-only" mode, which will forbid the application
from accepting new uploaded media, creating new media variants, or updating any metadata. This is
useful for complex environments that are capable of running a copy of the pict-rs application while
performing maintenance on the "real" deployment.

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).

### Danger-Dummy Mode

pict-rs 0.5 can now run without any external dependencies in "Danger-Dummy Mode." This allows
uploading and serving media, but all of the metadata for that media will be fake default values, and
the media cannot be processed in any way. This is not intended for production uses, since generic
file stores (like directly using object storage) are more tailored for this use case. Instead, this
is provided to enable applications to perform integration tests with pict-rs without needing to
reconstruct a valid environment to run the application.

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Media Variant Retention

Similar to the new proxy feature, pict-rs 0.5 now sets a time limit on media variants, and discards
them if they are not accessed within that time limit. Since variants can be regenerated on request,
there's no harm in removing them to save on storage space.

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Configurable Temporary Directory

pict-rs now supports using a non-default temporary directory. Previous versions of pict-rs have
resorted to the operating system's defined temporary directory, and that is still the default
behavior, but this can now be overridden from pict-rs' configuration.

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Serve From Object Storage

pict-rs 0.5 now supports serving images directly from object storage. This is achieved by telling
pict-rs the public URL at which your object storage is available in the object storage
configuration. When this is set up, any existing image requested from pict-rs will be served with a
redirect to the object storage URL. Since pict-rs is not intended to be exposed directly to the
internet, any proxy between the internet and pict-rs must be configured not to follow redirects, or
else that proxy will end up fetching the image from object-storage itself. In some cases, this might
be reasonable (e.g. if Web Access is cheaper than S3API access for fetching files).

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Prometheus Metrics

pict-rs 0.5 now optionally exposes a scrape endpoint for Prometheus metrics. This includes various
timings for requests, processing, and counts for pict-rs workings. It could be useful for admins to
help monitor the health of pict-rs as it runs.

For configuration information, see the example
[pict-rs.toml](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs/src/branch/main/pict-rs.toml).


### Internal Hashes Endpoint

pict-rs 0.5 offers a new internal endpoint at `/internal/hashes` which returns a paginated list of
all uploaded files, sorted from most recently uploaded to least recently uploaded. This endpoint
supports querying by timestamp in rfc3339 format in order to quickly jump deep into the list. The
number of returned results per page is also configurable.

For more information about this API, see the
[pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#api).


### Internal Delete Endpoint

pict-rs 0.5 offers a new internal endpoint for deleting aliases as `/internal/delete`. This is
distinct from the purge endpoint in that it doesn't purge a whole image with all it's aliases,
instead it simply deletes the provided alias and nothing more. It can be seen as an admin tool for
deleting an upload on behalf of a user.

For more information about this API, see the
[pict-rs readme](https://git.asonix.dog/asonix/pict-rs#api).


### Error Codes


### Clean Stray Magick Files


### Always Drain Payloads


### Constant-Time Equality for Deletions


### ini and json5


### Client Pool Size


### 0.3 Migration Path


### Prepare Upgrade Endpoint
